docs/getting-started.rst, before:

Getting started
===============

Installation
------------

Install hofmann from source:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install .

For pymatgen interoperability (optional):

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install ".[pymatgen]"

For development (tests + docs):

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install ".[all]"

Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Python 3.11+
- numpy >= 1.24
- matplotlib >= 3.7
- scipy >= 1.10
- pymatgen >= 2024.1.1 (optional, for :func:`~hofmann.from_pymatgen`)


Rendering from an XBS file
--------------------------

The XBS ``.bs`` file format describes atoms, species styles, and bond
rules in a simple text format (see :doc:`xbs-format`).

.. code-block:: python

   from hofmann import StructureScene

   scene = StructureScene.from_xbs("ch4.bs")
   scene.render_mpl("ch4.svg", show=False)

The output format is inferred from the file extension: ``.svg``, ``.pdf``,
and ``.png`` are all supported.


Rendering from pymatgen
-----------------------

If you have pymatgen installed, you can build a scene directly from a
``Structure`` object:

.. code-block:: python

   from pymatgen.core import Lattice, Structure
   from hofmann import StructureScene, BondSpec

   lattice = Lattice.cubic(5.4)
   structure = Structure(lattice, ["Si", "Si"],
                         [[0, 0, 0], [0.25, 0.25, 0.25]])

   bonds = [BondSpec(("Si", "Si"), 0.0, 2.8, 0.1, 0.5)]
   scene = StructureScene.from_pymatgen(structure, bonds, pbc=True)
   scene.render_mpl("si.pdf", show=False)

See :func:`~hofmann.from_pymatgen` for full details on periodic boundary
condition expansion and polyhedra support.

Commit message:

Add images and plot directives to documentation
- Pre-generated SVG images for index (perovskite hero), getting started
  (CH4), and user guide (style comparison grid, LLZO with polyhedra).
- matplotlib plot directive for live-rendered CH4 in the user guide.
- Image generation script in docs/_static/generate_images.py.
- Bundle Li7La3Zr2O12.cif example structure.
- Add docs/_build/ to .gitignore.

docs/getting-started.rst, after:

Getting started
===============

Installation
------------

Install hofmann from source:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install .

For pymatgen interoperability (optional):

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install ".[pymatgen]"

For development (tests + docs):

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install ".[all]"

Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Python 3.11+
- numpy >= 1.24
- matplotlib >= 3.7
- scipy >= 1.10
- pymatgen >= 2024.1.1 (optional, for :func:`~hofmann.from_pymatgen`)


Rendering from an XBS file
--------------------------

The XBS ``.bs`` file format describes atoms, species styles, and bond
rules in a simple text format (see :doc:`xbs-format`).

.. code-block:: python

   from hofmann import StructureScene

   scene = StructureScene.from_xbs("ch4.bs")
   scene.render_mpl("ch4.svg", show=False)

.. image:: _static/ch4.svg
   :width: 320px
   :align: center
   :alt: CH4 rendered from an XBS file

The output format is inferred from the file extension: ``.svg``, ``.pdf``,
and ``.png`` are all supported.


Rendering from pymatgen
-----------------------

If you have pymatgen installed, you can build a scene directly from a
``Structure`` object:

.. code-block:: python

   from pymatgen.core import Lattice, Structure
   from hofmann import StructureScene, BondSpec

   lattice = Lattice.cubic(5.4)
   structure = Structure(lattice, ["Si", "Si"],
                         [[0, 0, 0], [0.25, 0.25, 0.25]])

   bonds = [BondSpec(("Si", "Si"), 0.0, 2.8, 0.1, 0.5)]
   scene = StructureScene.from_pymatgen(structure, bonds, pbc=True)
   scene.render_mpl("si.pdf", show=False)

See :func:`~hofmann.from_pymatgen` for full details on periodic boundary
condition expansion and polyhedra support.
